# Unit 6: The CS1010 I/O Library

## Learning Objectives
After this unit, students should:

- understand the notion of standard input (`stdin`) and output (`stdout`) channels in Unix;
- be able to use the various print and read functions available in `libcs1010` to perform I/O.
- be aware that there exist pitfalls in using `printf` and `scanf` functions provided by C, and students should only use these functions if they know what they are doing.

## Interacting with Users

Our first C program that computes the hypotenuse doesn't do much -- it simply computes $\sqrt{3^2 + 4^2}$.  The value to be computed is hard-coded, and the result computed is not displayed.

To make this program more general and useful, we need to do two things:

- We need to compute the hypotenuse for any length of the base and the height of a right-angled triangle.  _Hard-coding_ the lengths in the program does not make the program useful.   Rather, we should read these values from the users.  
- We need to output the result of the computation to the users.  

In other words, to make the program more general and useful, we need to perform input and output, or I/O, in our program.

## Standard Input and Standard Output

Before we talk about how to read the input values and display the output values, we have to first talk about where the input comes from and where the output goes.

In Unix-flavored operating systems, the input is read from an abstract channel called the _standard input_ or `stdin` for short, and an output is sent to an abstract channel called the _standard output_ or `stdout` for short.

The fact that these channels are abstract is a powerful concept -- when we write our code, we do not have to worry about where the inputs come from and where the outputs go to.  It will depend on how the user runs our program.  Thus, it allows the users of our program the flexibility to control where the data comes from or goes.

For instance, the standard input, by default, reads from the keyboard.  But the user can choose to read from a file, using the redirection `<` operator _from the command line_ or the output of another process, using the pipe `|` operator _from the command line_.  Similarly, the standard output, by default, writes to the terminal.  But the user can choose to write to a file using the redirection `>` operator _on the command line_ or to the input of another process, using the pipe `|` operator, again, on the command line when invoking the program.  You will see how cool these are later.  But for C programming, it suffices to know for now that we only need to read from `stdin` and write to `stdout` in our code, and we let the users decide where they come from / go to.

## No `printf` and `scanf` (yet)

In almost all articles and textbooks on C that I have seen, the `scanf` and `printf` functions are taught as the standard C library functions to perform the input and output respectively.  The function `scanf`, however, is tricky to use correctly and securely.  The function `printf` comes with many nuances, such as having to remember the different conversion specifiers and modifiers.

CS1010 would rather not teach you `scanf` and `printf` at this stage and instead focus on how to solve computational problems with C.  As such, CS1010 provides you with a library to perform I/O.  The library provides a small set of essential functions to read and write `long` values, `double` values, space-separated words, and lines of text.

!!! warning "Use `printf` and `scanf` only if you know what you are doing"
	If you insist on using `printf` and `scanf` for your assignments, make sure you know what you are doing.  Otherwise, you will run into strange bugs if you are not using them correctly (and it is non-trivial to use them correctly).  If you are an experienced programmer with C, you can skip ahead to take a look at [Unit 27](27-stdio.md) on the pitfalls of using `printf` and `scanf`.

You can find the [documentation for the CS1010 I/O Library here](../guides/library.md).  We will see how to use the library to improve our hypotenuse computation program here.

## Using the CS1010 I/O Library

Let's modify our earlier program to now read the base and height from `stdin`, compute the hypotenuse, and print the results out to `stdout`.

```C title="Example: Reading and writing with standard I/O"
#include <math.h>
#include "cs1010.h"

long square(long x)
{
  return x*x;
}

double hypotenuse_of(long base, long height)
{
  long sum_of_square = square(base) + square(height);
  return sqrt((double)sum_of_square);
}

int main()
{
  long base = cs1010_read_long();
  long height = cs1010_read_long();
  double hypotenuse = hypotenuse_of(base, height);
  cs1010_println_double(hypotenuse);
}
```

The first change you see (on Line 2) is to include the file `cs1010.h`, which includes the declaration of functions provided by the library.  On Lines 17 and 18, we introduce two new `long` variables named `base` and `height`, which we initialized with the returned value from `cs1010_read_long()`.  The function `cs1010_read_long` reads a `long` value from `stdin` and returns the value.  For now, we assume that the inputs are correctly passed to the program.

!!! warning "Remember to include `()`"
	C requires that function calls be identified with `()`.  It is common for beginners
	to skip `()` and call a function like `long base = cs1010_read_long;` leading to
	compilation errors.

Finally, on Line 20, we print the resulting hypotenuse to `stdout` using the library function `cs1010_println_double`.  Note that there are two versions of functions to print a `double` value: `cs1010_println_double` and `cs1010_print_double`.  The one with `println` prints a newline character as well.

Refer to the [CS1010 Compilation Guide](../guides/clang.md) on how to compile a program that uses the CS1010 I/O library.

## When to Use Variables

One of the decisions that we need to make when writing programs is when to introduce a new variable into our code.  In cases where we need to keep track of a state (e.g., $i$ and $m$ from [Unit 2](02-algo.md)), using a variable is necessary.  In other instances, we may want to use a variable to store a value so that we do not need to compute the same value repeatedly (e.g., $k$ from [Unit 2](02-algo.md)).

Sometimes, however, it is useful to introduce a variable for readability. For instance, the `main` function above can be written as a single statement without any variable and assignment.

```C title="Example: Calculating hypotenuse without declaring any variables"
int main()
{
  cs1010_println_double(hypotenuse_of(cs1010_read_long(), cs1010_read_long()));
}
```

The resulting code, however, is not necessarily easier to comprehend.
On the other hand, the following snippet is easier to comprehend:

```C
int main()
{
  long base = cs1010_read_long();
  long height = cs1010_read_long();
  double hypotenuse = hypotenuse_of(base, height);
  cs1010_println_double(hypotenuse);
}
```

Here, we introduce variables with a descriptive name and indicate what each value read from `stdin` is meant for, and what the value we are printing to `stdout` is.  The sequence of execution is also clearer as we read the C statements from top to bottom: we read the two inputs first, then we compute the hypotenuse, then we print.

_When writing programs, it is sometimes useful to declare and introduce new variables to temporarily hold a value_ to make your code more readable.

We, however, need to avoid overdoing it.  For instance, consider the code below:

```C
double hypotenuse_of(long base, long height)
{
  long to_be_squared = base;
  double square_base = (double)square(to_be_squared);

  to_be_squared = height;
  double square_height = (double)square(to_be_squared);

  double hypotenuse = sqrt(square_base + square_height);
  return hypotenuse;
}
```

The variable `to_be_squared` does not improve the readability of the code.
