# Exercise 5: Multi-Dimensional Arrays 

### Prerequisite

You have completed [Exercise 4](ex04.md). 

### Learning Outcomes

Be comfortable writing simple C programs that involve 2D arrays.

### Deadline

This exercise is part of the CS1010 formative assessment. Submit your solution before 23 October 2023, 23:59 to receive feedback and earn your achievement "badges".

### Acceptance Link

The link to accept the exercise is not available publicly.  Visit Canvas for the link.

### Concepts and Difficulty

| | Question                  | Fixed 2D Arrays  | Dynamic 2D Array | Jagged Array     | Difficulty     |
|-|---------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|----------------|
|1| [Add](#question-1-add)^   | :material-check: |                  |                  | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|2| [Echo](#question-2-echo)  |                  | :material-check: |                  | :material-star: :material-star: |
|3| [Line](#question-3-line)^ |                  | :material-check: |                  | :material-star: :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|4| [Popular](#question-4-popular)^ |            | :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-star: :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|5| [Contact](#question-5-contact)  |            | :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-star: :material-star: :material-star: |
|6| [Social](#question-6-social)    |            | :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-star: :material-star: :material-star: :material-star: |

^: Questions 2, 3, and 4 serve as in-class exercises during the lab session in Week 9.

### CS1010 I/O Library

You may need to use a new collection of functions available in the CS1010 I/O library for this exercise onwards.

- `cs1010_read_word_array`
- `cs1010_read_line_array`

## Question 1: Add

Write a program `add` that reads two 3x3 matrices $M$ and $N$ from the standard inputs and prints the resulting matrix $M + N$ to the standard output.

For example,

$\begin{pmatrix}
3 & 1 & 2\\
0 & 4 & 1\\
3 & 5 & 0 \\
\end{pmatrix}$ + 
$\begin{pmatrix}
1 & -1 & 3\\
-1 & 2 & 0\\
0 & 1 & 3 \\
\end{pmatrix}$
=
$\begin{pmatrix}
4 & 0 & 5\\
-1 & 6 & 1\\
3 & 6 & 3 \\
\end{pmatrix}$


If the two input matrices are
```
3 1 2
0 4 1
3 5 0
```

and
```
1 -1 3
-1 2 0
0 1 3
```

then print to the standard output
```
4 0 5
-1 6 1
3 6 3
```

### Sample Run

```
ooiwt@pe101:~$ ./add
3 1 2
0 4 1
3 5 0
1 -1 3
-1 2 0
0 1 3
4 0 5
-1 6 1
3 6 3
```

## Question 2: Echo

Write a program `echo` that reads a 2D matrix of integers and prints the matrix back to the standard output.

The input consists of the following:

- the first two numbers correspond to $R$, the number of rows, and $C$, the number of columns of the matrix respectively
- the next line contains $R$ x $C$ integers.

Print to the standard output:

- $R$ rows of numbers, each row contains $C$ integers, corresponding to the rows of the matrix.

Your code should contain two functions:

```C
long **read_matrix(size_t nrows, size_t ncols) {
  :
}
```

to allocate, read, and return the matrix (return NULL if allocation
fails).

and

```C
void print_matrix(size_t nrows, size_t ncols, long **matrix) {
  :
}
```

to print the matrix.

### Sample Run

```
ooiwt@pe101:~$ ./echo
3 4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8
9 10 11 12
```


## Question 3: Line

Write a program that draws a white line on an image with a black background of sizes $W$ and $H$.

The line is specified as two coordinates ($x_1$, $y_1$) and ($x_2$, $y_2$).  The top left corner has a coordinate (0,0).  The x coordinates increase to the right; the y coordinates increase to the bottom.

Let ($x$, $y$) be any point that lies on this line, then we have:

$$ \frac{y-y_1}{y_2 - y1} = \frac{x-x_1}{x_2-x_1}$$

We can rearrange and get:

$$y = \frac{y_2-y_1}{x_2 - x1}(x-x_1) + y_1$$

Let

$$m = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}$$

be the slope of the line.

If the line passes through ($x$, $y$), then it passes through ($x + 1$, $y + m$).

Mathematically, x and y are floating-point numbers.  But, when we draw the line in an image, we have to round them into integers.  This process is called _rasterization_ in computer graphics.

To draw a rasterized straight line, we can then loop through different values of $x$, from $x_1$ to $x_2$, and update the corresponding value of $y$ (by repeatedly adding $m$ every time $x$ increments by 1).

Since $y$ is a floating-point number, we round $y$ to the nearest integer and draw the line at pixel ($x, y$).  You may find the function `round` from `math.h` useful.

We will draw the output in an image format called PGM.  Each pixel of the image has a value ranging between 0 and 255.  For this question, we draw images with two colors: 0 for the black background and 255 for the white line.

Your program should read from the standard input:

- Two positive integers, $W$ and $H$ ($W$ > 1, $H$ > 1)
- Four non-negative integers, $x_1$, $y_1$, $x_2$, $y_2$, that corresponds to the two endpoints ($x_1$, $y_1$) and ($x_2$, $y_2$) of the line.  The slope of the line is guaranteed to be between -1 and 1.  Furthermore, $x_2$ > $x_1$.

Your program should print to the standard output,

- The first line contains the string "P2"

- The second line contains two integers, the width $W$ and height $H$ of the image

- The third line contains the number 255

- The rest of the output contains $W\times H$ integers, each having a value of either 0 or 255.  Each value corresponds to a pixel in the output image.  The order of the pixels is from left to right, top to bottom.  Each row of the image must be printed on a separate line.

If you pipe your output into `~cs1010/bin/viu`, you can visualize your output as an image.

```
ooiwt@pe101:~$ ./line < inputs/line.3.in | ~cs1010/bin/viu -
```

Note that if your image to too big to fit your terminal, `viu` will resize your image.

### Sample Runs

```
ooiwt@pe101:~$ ./line
4 4
0 0 3 3
P2
4 4
255
255 0 0 0
0 255 0 0
0 0 255 0
0 0 0 255
ooiwt@pe101:~$ ./line
4 4
0 2 3 2
P2
4 4
255
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
255 255 255 255
0 0 0 0
```

## Question 4: Popular

We can measure the popularity of a person by how many friends a person has.  We assume that "friend" is a symmetric relation. If A is a friend of B, then B is a friend of A.  Because of this, we can represent friendships between people as a lower triangular matrix (using a jagged 2D array). A proper type to store in each element of the matrix is bool. To simplify our life, however, we store each element of the matrix as a char, with '1' representing a friendship connection, and '0' otherwise. The friendship for $n$ people is thus an array of $n$ strings, each string containing characters of '0' and '1' only. The first row of the matrix is a string of length one; the second row is of length two; the third row, length three, etc. The last character of each string (i.e., the diagonal of the matrix) is 1 as we assume everyone is a friend with him/herself.

For instance, suppose we have the following friendship relations.  We represent each person with id 0, 1, 2, ... Person with id $i$ has its information stored in Row $i$ and Column $i$. Recall that if Row $i$ and Column $j$ is 1, it means that Person $i$ is a friend of Person $j$.

```
1
01
011
```

The relation indicates that Person 1 and 2 are friends with each other. Person 0 is not a friend of 1 and 2. 

The example below adds another Person 4, who is a friend of Person 0 and Person 2.
```
1
01
011
1011
```

Write a program `popular`, that reads from standard input:

- a positive integer $n$,
- followed by $n$ lines of strings consisting of '1' or '0' representing the friendship among these $n$ people.

Print, to the standard output, 

- the id of the person who is the most popular (i.e., with the most number of friends).  We break ties by preferring the person with a smaller id.
- the number of friends that the person has.

The purpose of this question is for you to practice using a jagged 2D array. Hence, you are not allowed to store the input matrix or intermediate matrices using a rectangular array, or you risk being penalized heavily for this question.

### Sample Runs

```
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/popular.1.in
3
1
01
011
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./popular < inputs/popular.1.in
1
1
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/popular.2.in
4
1
01
011
1011
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./popular < inputs/popular.2.in
2
2
```

## Question 5: Contact

Contact tracing is an important step to contain a pandemic. Suppose we are given the information on who is in contact with whom. We wish to answer the following questions:

- Given two people A and B, have they been directly in contact with each other?
- Given two people A and B, is there a common person that they have been in contact with? In other words, is there a third person C, where (i) A and C have been in contact with each other, and (ii) B and C have been in contact with each other?

We assume that "contact" is a symmetric relation. If A has been in contact with B, then B has been in contact with A too. Because of this, we can represent the contact traces between n people as a lower triangular matrix (using a jagged 2D array). Similar to Question 1, we store each element of the matrix as a char, with '1' representing a contact, and '0' otherwise. The contact traces for $n$ people is again an array of $n$ strings, each string containing characters of '0' and '1' only. The first row of the matrix is a string of length one; the second row is of length two; the third row, length three, etc. The last character of each string (i.e., the diagonal of the matrix) is 1 since everyone has contact with him/herself.

Write a program contact, that reads from standard input:

- a positive integer $n$,
- followed by $n$ lines of strings consisting of '1' or '0' representing the contact traces of these $n$ people.
- followed by two positive integers $j$ and $k$, representing the ids of a pair of people we are interested in querying. An input of $i$ corresponds to the person whose contact information is stored in Row $i$ and Column $i$.

Print, to the standard output, the following information:

- "direct contact" if there is direct contact between $j$ and $k$
- "contact through x" if there is no direct contact but there is an indirect contact between $j$ and $k$ through a third person $x$ (replace $x$ with the actual id). If there are multiple such people, output the person with the smallest id.
- "no contact" if there is no direct or indirect contact through a third person in the contact traces.

The purpose of this question is for you to practice using a jagged 2D array. Hence, you are not allowed to store the input matrix or intermediate matrices using a rectangular array, or you risk being penalized heavily for this question.

### Sample Runs

```
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/contact.1.in
3
1
11
011
0 1
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./contact < inputs/contact.1.in
direct contact
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/contact.2.in
3
1
11
011
0 2
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./contact < inputs/contact.2.in
contact through 1
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/contact.3.in
4
1
01
011
1011
0 1
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./contact < inputs/contact.3.in
no contact
```

## Question 6: Social

You should solve this question after solving Questions 4 and 5. The functions you wrote for Questions 4 and 5 might be useful for solving this question.

In this question, we are interested in understanding the social network of a group of people.  Suppose that person A is a friend of person B, then we say that A is connected to B with one hop, or A is one hop away from B. 

Consider a friend of B, say C, who is not a friend of A. So C is a friend of a friend of A. We say that C is two hops away from A, and there is a chain of friendship of 2 hops between A and C (A -> B -> C). 

Suppose there are $n$ people, and we know the social network of these $n$ people -- i.e., we know who is a friend with whom.  We call the network a social network of degree 1.  Your task is to compute a social network of degree $k$, representing who is connected to whom via a friendship chain of up to $k$ hops.

Similar to Question 1, we assume that friendship is bi-directional -- if A is a friend of B, then B is a friend of A. We represent a social network as a lower triangular matrix (using a jagged 2D array) in the same format as Question 1, where a 1 in Row $i$ and Column $j$ means Person $i$ and Person $j$ are friends; 0 otherwise.

The social network below shows the friendship relations between four people.

```
1
01
011
1011
```

Suppose now we consider the social network of degree 2. Person 0 is two hops away from Person 2 (Person 0 knows Person 3, and Person 3 knows Person 2). Person 1 is also two hops away from Person 3 (Person 1 knows Person 2 and Person 2 knows Person 3).

The social network of degree 2 becomes:

```
1
01
111
1111
```

Write a program `social`, that reads from standard input two positive integers $n$ and $k$, followed by $n$ lines of strings consisting of '1' or '0' representing the social network of degree 1 of these $n$ people. Print, to the standard output, the social network of degree $k$ formed by friendship chains of up to $k$ hops.

The purpose of this question is for you to practice using a jagged 2D array. Hence, you are not allowed to store the input matrix or intermediate matrices using a rectangular array, or you risk being penalized heavily for this question.

### Hint

There are many ways to solve this problem. The most straightforward way is to compute the social network formed by a friendship chain of degree $i$, $N(i)$, changing $i$ from 1 to $k$.

- $N(1)$ is just the input;
- $N(2)$ can be computed in a similar way to how you solved Question 2.
- Now, given $N(i-1)$ and $N(1)$, can you compute $N(i)$?

### Sample Runs

```
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/social.1.in
3 1
1
11
011
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./social < inputs/social.1.in
1
11
011
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/social.2.in
4 2
1
01
011
1011
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./social < inputs/social.2.in
1
01
111
1111
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ cat inputs/social.3.in
5 2
1
11
011
0011
10011
ooiwt@pe119:~/as05-skeleton$ ./social < inputs/social.3.in
1
11
111
1111
11111
```
