# Exercise 1: Conditionals

### Prerequisite

You have completed [Exercise 0](ex00.md). 

### Learning Outcomes

Be comfortable writing simple C programs that involve conditional statements and logical expressions.

### Concepts and Difficulty

| | Question                      | Conditions      | Comparison      | Logical Expression | Recursion    |  Difficulty     |
|-|-------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------------|--------------|-----------------|
|1| [Odd](#question-1-odd)          | :material-check: | :material-check: |                |                 | :material-star: |
|2| [Sum](#question-2-sum)          | :material-check: | :material-check: |                |                 | :material-star: |
|3| [Candy](#question-3-candy)      | :material-check: | :material-check: |                |                 | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|4| [Triangle](#question-4-triangle)| :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-check: |               | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|5| [Leap](#question-5-leap-year)   | :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-check: |               | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|6| [Multiple](#question-6-multiple)| :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-check: |               | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|7| [Digits](#question-7-digits)    | :material-check: | :material-check: |                 | :material-check: | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|8| [Power](#question-8-power)      | :material-check: | :material-check: |                 | :material-check: | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|9| [Suffix](#question-9-suffix)    | :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-check: |               | :material-star: :material-star-half: |
|10| [Taxi](#question-10-taxi-fare) | :material-check: | :material-check: | :material-check: |               | :material-star: :material-star: |

## Question 1: Odd

Write a program `odd` (source file `odd.c`) that reads in an integer $n$ and prints that smallest odd number that is larger than $n$ to the standard output.

Your program must find the answer within a function that takes in an integer and returns an integer called `find_next_odd`.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./odd
1234
1235
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./echo
-1
1
```

Note: There is a less straightforward way to solve this question without using conditional statements.  See if you can solve it this way! (Credit: Hu Jialun (cohort 20/21))

## Question 2: Sum

Write a program `sum` (source file `sum.c`) that reads in two integers, $x$ and $y$, ignores any negative numbers, and prints the sum of the remaining (non-negative) numbers.  If both numbers are negatives, the sum is 0.

Your program must find the answer within a function named `compute_sum_if_positive`.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./sum
123456
-100
123456
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./sum
-1
-2
0
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./sum
1
2
3
```

## Question 3: Candy

Beng needs to pack a bunch of candies into as few boxes as possible.  Each box can hold only a certain number of candies.

Write a program `candy` that reads from the standard input two positive integers representing the number of candies that Beng has and the maximum number of candies that a box can hold.

Your program must contain a function called `compute_num_of_boxes` that computes the minimum number of boxes that Beng needs to pack all the candies into.  The function should take in the number of candies and the maximum number of candies a box can hold as arguments, and return the number of boxes needed.

Your program then prints, to the standard output, the number of boxes needed.

For example, if there are 8 candies and each box can hold a maximum of 2 candies, then Beng needs 4 boxes.  If each box can hold a maximum of 3 candies, then only 3 boxes are needed.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./candy
8 2
4
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./candy
8 3
3
```

## Question 5: Triangle

Triangle is a three-sided shape and is a very common shape everywhere.  In a triangle, the sum of the length of any two sides is always longer than of the third side.  The area of the triangle with sides $a$, $b$, $c$, can be computed with Heron's formula:

$$\sqrt{s(s-a)(s-b)(s-c)}$$

where $s$ is half of the perimeter:

$$s = \frac{a + b + c}{2}$$

Write a program `triangle` that reads from standard input three positive integers representing the three sides of a triangle.  The program then either
- prints, to the standard output, `Possible` if it is possible to create such a triangle, followed by the area of the triangle; or
- prints `Impossible` if it is impossible to create such a triangle.

For instance, suppose that you are given the three sides of a triangle `3 4 5`. Then the program prints:
```
Possible
6.0000
```

Suppose that you are given the three sides `4 4 10`. Then the program prints:
```
Impossible
```

Your solution must contain two functions `is_possible_triangle`, which returns whether the input is a possible triangle, and `compute_area`, which computes the area of the triangle.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./triangle
3 4 5
Possible
6.0000
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./triangle
4 4 10
Impossible
```

Question Credit: Albert Sutiono (cohort 20/21)

# Question 5: Leap Year

A [leap year](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leap_year) is a calendar year containing an extra day to synchronize the calendar to seasons and astronomical events.  In the Gregorian calendar, years that are multiples of four (except for years divisible by 100 but not by 400) are leap years.

Complete the program `leap.c` so that it reads in an integer representing a year from the standard input and prints out "<year> is a leap year" if the input is a leap year.  Otherwise, print "<year> is not a leap year" to the standard output.

Your program should include a `bool` function `is_leap_year` that takes in the input year and returns `true` if the input is a leap year and returns `false` otherwise.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1995
1995 is not a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1996
1996 is a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1900
1900 is not a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
2000
2000 is a leap year
```

# Question 6: Multiple

Given two integers, we want to check if one is a multiple of the other.  By definition, 0 is the multiple of any number.

Write a program `multiple` that reads two integers from the standard input, and prints `true` to the standard output if one integer is the multiple of the other. Print `false` otherwise.

Your program should include a `bool` function `is_multiple` that takes in the two integers and return if one is the multiple of the other.

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./multiple
3 8
false
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./multiple
8 2
true
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./multiple
0 190
true
```


## Question 7: Digits

Write a program `digits.c` that reads in a non-negative integer, and prints the sum of the cube of individual digits in this integer.

For instance, if the input is `1933091`, then the sum is $1^3 + 9^3 + 3^3 + 3^3 + 0^3 + 9^3 + 1^3 = 1514$.

You must not use a loop to solve this.  Instead, write a recursive function `sum_of_digits_cubed`.  This function takes in an integer and returns the sum of the cube of individual digits of that integer, and it should call itself to solve this question.

A solution that uses a loop in any way will be considered incorrect for this question.

### Sample Run
```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./digits
1933091
1514
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./digits
10
1
```

## Question 8: Power

Write a program `power.c` that reads in two values: (i) an integer base $$x$$ and (ii) a non-negative integer exponent $$y$$, and compute $$x^y$$.

You must not use a loop to solve this.  Instead, write a recursive function `compute_power` that takes in takes in the base $$x$$ and the exponent $$y$$ and return $$x^y$$.  This function should call itself to solve this question.

A solution that uses a loop in any way will be considered incorrect for this question.

### Sample Run
```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./power
2 3
8
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./power
1 0
1
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./power
-2 62
4611686018427387904
```


## Question 9: Suffix

In English, an ordinal number is written with numerals, followed by its letter suffixes.  For instance: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 11th, 31st, etc.  The rule is that a number that ends with digit 1 should have a suffix "st" (except if it ends with 11), a number that ends with 2 should have a suffix "nd" (except if it ends with 12), and a number that ends with 3 should have a suffix "rd" (except if it ends with 13).  All other numbers should end with "th".

Write a program `suffix` that reads in an integer number from the standard input and prints out the number with its ordinal suffix.

Your program should include a `void` function `print_with_suffix(long n)` that takes in the input and prints out the number followed by its suffix.

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./suffix
2
2nd
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./suffix
13
13th
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./suffix
412
412th
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./suffix
3
3rd
```

## Question 10: Taxi Fare 

The taxi fare structure in Singapore must be one of the most complicated in the world! Check out:
[http://www.taxisingapore.com/taxi-fare/](http://www.taxisingapore.com/taxi-fare/).

For this exercise, we will just use the following simplified fare structure:

|Basic Fare|      |
|----------|------|
|The first 1 km or less (Flag Down) | $3.90 |
|Every 400 m thereafter or less, up to 10 km | $0.24 |
|Every 350 m thereafter or less, after 10 km | $0.24 |

|Surcharge|||
|----------|------|---|
|Monday to Friday | 6:00 to 9:29 | 25% of metered fare |
|Daily | 18:00 to 23:59| 25% of metered fare|
|Daily | 0:00 (midnight) to 5:59 | 50% of metered fare|

Note that the surcharge is applicable based on the boarding time. For instance, if the trip started at 17:50 and ended at 18:10, then no surcharge is incurred.

Write a program `taxi.c` that computes the taxi fare.  The program, called `taxi`, takes in four integers as inputs:

- The first is the day of the week.  It can only be the value `0` to `6`, `0` denotes Sunday, `1` denotes Monday, ..., and `6` denotes Saturday.
- The second and the third inputs denote the starting time of the trip: the second input indicates the hours since midnight of the stated day, and the third input indicates the minutes since the beginning of the stated hours.
- The fourth and final input is the distance of the trip, in meters.

Your program should print a single floating point number, which is the cost of the fare in dollars.

Examine the following examples for more details:

### Example 1
```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./taxi
1 17 59 1000
3.9000
```


- Start: Mon 17:59
- Distance: 1,000 m

The metered fare is $3.90 since the distance traveled is 1 km.  The boarding time is before 18:00, so there is no surcharge.  The total fare is $3.90.

### Example 2
```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./taxi
1 17 57 2000
4.6200
```

- Start: Mon 17:57
- Distance: 2,000 m

The metered fare for the first 1,000 m (1 km) is $3.90.  The next 1,000 m is charged $0.24 for every 400 m (or less) traveled.  The passenger is charged an additional 3 x $0.24 = $0.72, giving the total metered fare of $4.62.  

The boarding time is before 18:00, so there is no surcharge.

### Example 3
```
ooiwt@pe111:~/ex01-ooiwt$ ./taxi
1 5 50 15000
19.5300
```

- Start: Mon 05:50
- Distance: 15,000 m

The metered fare for the first 1,000 m (1 km) is $3.90.  The next 9,000 m is charged $0.24 for every 400 m traveled.  The passenger is charged an additional 23 x $0.24 = $5.52.  The remaining 5,000 m is charged $0.24 for every 350 m (or less) traveled.  The passenger is charged an additional 15 x $0.24 = $3.60.  The metered fare is $3.90 + $5.52 + $3.60 = $13.02

The boarding time is before 6:00, so there is a 50% surcharge.  The total fare is $19.53.

### Instructions

- Break down this problem into multiple sub-problems, each can be solved by a function.  _Write one function to answer each question below_:

    - given the day of the week, is it a weekday?
    - given the time of boarding, does it fall under the morning peak hour (6:00 - 9:29)?
    - given the time of boarding, does it fall under the evening peak hour (18:00 - 23:59)?
    - given the time of boarding, does it fall under the midnight peak hour (0:00 - 5:59)?

- Furthermore, break the calculation of fare down into two parts: the basic metered fare and the surcharge. Each of these can be a function.  Think about the four inputs to the `taxi` program.  Which one is needed to compute the metered fare?  Which ones are used to compute the surcharge?  Pass in the appropriate arguments to the function that computes the metered fare and the function that computes the surcharge.

