# Exercise 2: Date, Pressure, GCD, Leap, Multiple

### Deadline

There is no deadline, but we encourage you to complete this exercise before completing Assignment 1.

### Prerequisite

You have completed [Exercise 0](ex00.md).

### Learning Outcomes

Be comfortable writing simple C programs that involve conditional statements and logical expressions.

### Grading

This assignment is not graded.

-------

# Question 4: Leap Year

A [leap year](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leap_year) is a calendar year containing an extra day to synchronize the calendar to seasons and astronomical events.  In the Gregorian calendar, years that are multiples of four (except for years divisible by 100 but not by 400) are leap years.

Complete the program `leap.c` so that it reads in an integer representing a year from the standard input and prints out "<year> is a leap year" if the input is a leap year.  Otherwise, print "<year> is not a leap year" to the standard output.

Your program should include a `bool` function `is_leap_year` that takes in the input year and returns `true` if the input is a leap year and returns `false` otherwise.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1995
1995 is not a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1996
1996 is a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1900
1900 is not a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
2000
2000 is a leap year
```

# Question 5: Multiple

Given two integers, we want to check if one is a multiple of the other.  By definition, 0 is the multiple of any number.

Write a program `multiple` that reads two integers from the standard input, and prints `true` to the standard output if one integer is the multiple of the other. Print `false` otherwise.

Your program should include a `bool` function `is_multiple` that takes in the two integers and return if one is the multiple of the other.

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./multiple
3 8
false
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./multiple
8 2
true
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./multiple
0 190
true
```

Question Credit: Hu Jialun (Cohort 20/21)
