# Assignment 4: SelectionSort, Mastermind

### Deadline

8 October 2020 (Thursday), 23:59

### Prerequisite

- You are able to access the [CS1010 programming environment](environments.md).
- You are familiar with [basic UNIX CLI](unix.md) and using terminal-based editor [`vim`](vim.md).
- You have gone through Exercise 1 and have already set up your `.gitconfig`.
- You are familiar with the steps of accepting, downloading, and submitting your exercise and assignment.
- You are familiar with the directory structure and the common files included in your assignment skeleton.

### Learning Outcomes

- Be comfortable writing C programs that involve arithmetic operations, `long`, `double`, `bool`, and `char` types, conditional `if`/`else` statements, loops with `while`/`for`/`do-while` statements, arrays, and strings.
- Be comfortable breaking down a problem into smaller subproblems that can be resolved using functions, including reusing existing functions written for other programs (with a tweak), writing a function that calls itself, designing what should the inputs and return values/types of a function be.

### Setup

- [Click on this link](https://classroom.github.com/a/LxY8OrMc) to accept the assignment.
- Login to one of the hosts of [CS1010 programming environment](environments.md)
- Run:

```
~cs1010/get-as04
```

- You should see the folder `as04-<github id>` in your home directory with the assignment skeleton inside.

### Solving The Assignments

- Edit the files `selectionsort.c` and `mastermind.c`, to solve the corresponding question as described below.
- You should break down the problem into smaller subproblems, and write one function for each of the subproblem to solve the problem.  
- To compile and run tests with the sample inputs and outputs:

```
make
```

- The test cases are given in the `inputs` and `outputs` subdirectory.  You can use `cat` or `less` to look at the content of these test cases.  You can add more test cases or edit the given ones if needed.

### Submission

When you are ready, run the following command to submit:

```
~cs1010/submit-as04
```

The files `selectionsort.c` `mastermind.c`, will be uploaded to GitHub.  You can submit multiple times, but only the last submission will be graded.

!!! warn "Editing Your Files in Multiple Locations"
    You should edit your code only on the CS1010 PE hosts.  If you choose to edit your code in other places, such as directly on Github or in a second location (such as your own laptop), you need to be comfortable with various `git` command to synchronize your code across the different locations, possibly needing to resolve synchronization conflicts.  

Only the C files listed above will be submitted.  You can create additional C files for testing different solutions, but eventually, you must put your solution into the corresponding C file provided as the skeleton.

### Identifying Yourself

In every C file that you submit to CS1010, you need to identify yourself by writing your name and tutorial group. Marks will be deducted if you fail to do so. You need to edit the line:

```
@author XXXX (Group YYYY)
```

and change it to something like:

```
@author Katherine Janeway (Group V01)
```

### Grading

This assignment contributes towards 3% of your final grade.  The total mark for this assignment is 30 marks.  There are four marking criteria: correctness, documentation, style, efficiency.

- **NEW** Documentation: For each question, two marks are allocated for documentation.  Please refer to the [documentation](documentation.md) and follow the recommended format.  You need to explain the purpose of _every_ file, function, and parameter.  Logic in your code that is not obvious should be explained as well.
- Style: For each question, two marks are allocated for style.  Please refer to the [CS1010 C Style Guide](style.md) and follow the recommended guideline.  
- Efficiency: For each question, two marks are allocated for efficiency.  You might get a deduction here if you loop through the arrays more times than necessary.
- Correctness: The rest of the marks are allocated to correctness.  Note that passing the tests does not guarantee that your code is correct.  Correctness here is defined in the broad sense of using the various programming constructs in C (type, function, variable, loops, conditionals, arithmetic expressions, logical expressions) _properly_, not just producing the correct output and bug-free.  

**NEW** Warning checks:

- We will start checking if you handle the return value from `cs1010_read_*_array()` correctly (checks for `NULL` and calling `free`).
- We added new warning flags to check for improper function declarations and documentation.

**NEW** Reduced test data:

We have been providing lots of test data to help you test your program.  We will reduce the number of test cases provided from now on.  You should come up with your own test cases to test your code to make sure it covers all the cases (especially the edge cases).

We reserve the right to penalize students for using banned C syntax in the assignments.  In addition, each grader at his or her own discretion can penalize students for repeating mistakes / bad practices from the student's past assignments (even if it was just a warning with no marks deducted in the earlier assignments).

### Questions

To acclimatize you to the PE1 condition, the questions for this assignment are included in the skeleton instead, in a file named `questions.md`.

You should learn how to use `vim` to open both the `.c` file and the `questions.md` side-by-side (see https://nus-cs1010.github.io/2021-s1/vim.html#splitting-vims-viewport)
