# Exercise 11: TicTacToe, Sun, Replace, Soil, Substring

### PE2 AY20/21 Semester 1

### Deadline

This is an ungraded exercise.

### Prerequisite

- You are able to access the [CS1010 programming environment](environments.md).
- You are familiar with [basic UNIX CLI](unix.md) and using terminal-based editor [`vim`](vim.md).
- You have gone through Exercise 0 and have already set up your `.gitconfig`.
- You are familiar with the steps of accepting, downloading, and submitting your exercise and assignment.
- You are familiar with the directory structure and the common files included in your assignment skeleton.
- You are comfortable writing simple C programs that involve arithmetic operations, `long`, `double`, and `bool` types, conditional `if`/`else` statements, and loops.
- You are comfortable writing C programs that involve 1D and multi-dimension arrays
- You are comfortable breaking down a problem into smaller sub-problems which can be resolved using functions, including reusing existing functions written for other programs (with a tweak), writing a function that calls itself, designing what should the inputs and return values/types of a function.
- You are able to write C programs that are neat and readable, adhering to a common prescribed coding convention.
- You are familiar with the principles behind binary search and common O(n^2) sorting algorithms. 
- You are familiar with solving problems recursively.

### Setup

- First, [accept the assignment on GitHub](https://classroom.github.com/a/vvDOfPoW)
- Then, log in to one of the hosts of [CS1010 programming environment](environments.md) and run

```
~cs1010/get-ex11
```

- You should see the folder `ex11-<github username>` in your home directory with the assignment skeleton inside.
- Inside that directory, you should see the following files:
    - `tictactoe.c`, `sun.c`, `replace.c`, `soil.c` and `substring.c` are the most important files.  They are the skeleton C code that you should edit to solve the assignment and the only files that you should change.
    - `inputs` and `outputs` are subdirectories that contain test inputs and test outputs.  We use the same convention as Exercise 0 so you should already be familiar with them.
    - `Makefile`: This is the configuration for the tool `make` that we use to automate the compilation and testing of the programs.  
    - `test.sh`: This is a bash script for testing your code.
    - `compile_flags.txt`: This file specifies the flags for compilation and is used by both `make` and `clang-tidy`.
	- `Questions.md` containing the description of the questions.  This is a plain text file that you can view with `vim`, `less`, or other tools.

### Solving The Assignments

- Edit the files `tictactoe.c`, `sun.c`, `replace.c`, `soil.c` and `substring.c` to solve the corresponding question as described in `Questions.md`.
- To compile and run tests with the sample inputs and outputs:
```
make
```
This command will compile all your C files with the appropriate settings and if there is no error, run the test scripts.  If you pass the test cases, it will run `clang-tidy` to check if your code follows good code practices.

- The test cases are given in the `inputs` and `outputs` subdirectory.  You can use `cat` or `less` to look at the content of these test cases.  You can add more test cases or edit the given ones if needed.

- To compile individual program, type
	```
	make <program>
	```
	For instance, the command
	```
	make tictactoe
	```
	compiles `tictactoe.c` into `echo` without testing or running `clang-tidy` on it.

- To test individial program, run
	```
	./test.sh <program>
	```

	For instance, the command
	```
	./test.sh tictactoe
	```
	tests `tictactoe` without compiling or running `clang-tidy` on `echo.c`.

### Submission

When you are ready, run the following command to submit:

```
~cs1010/submit-ex11
```

The files `tictactoe.c`, `sun.c`, `replace.c`, `soil.c`, and `substring.c` will be uploaded to GitHub.  You can submit multiple times, but only the last submission will be graded.

!!! warning "Manipulating Files on GitHub"
    Do not manipulate (e.g., edit) the files on GitHub or close the pull requests on GitHub.  Doing so would interfere with the scripts and the grading/testing process of CS1010.

### Identifying Yourself

In every C file that you submit to CS1010, you need to identify yourself by writing your name and tutorial group. Marks will be deducted if you fail to do so. You need to edit the line:

```
@author XXXX (Group YYYY)
```

and change it to something like:

```
@author Dana Scully (Group G02)
```

### Questions

To acclimatize you to the PE condition, the questions for this assignment is included in the skeleton instead, in a file named `Questions.md`.

You should learn how to use `vim` to open both the `.c` file and `Questions.md` side-by-side (see https://nus-cs1010.github.io/2122-s1/vim.html#splitting-vims-viewport)
